---
title: CS110L L5 - Traits and Generics
date: 2025-05-06 20:30:02
categories: 笔记
tags:
    - rust
excerpt: First impression on traits and generics
---

{% notel orange fa-triangle-exclamation Warning %}
If someone is reading this blog, please be aware that the writer **did not** consider the experience of the other readers.
After all, the most important part is about writing things down for better memorization.
{% endnotel %}

## Traits

> A trait defines the functionality a particular type has and can share with other types. We can use traits to define shared behavior in an abstract way. We can use trait bounds to specify that a generic type can be any type that has certain behavior.

- Traits are like what is called 'interface' in other languages, allowing programmers to define shared behavior or override default behavior.

### Overriding Traits

- For example, one can override the `Display` functionality in order to define the way an object gets print out:

    ```rust
    impl fmt::Display for LinkedList {
        fn display(&self, f: fmt::Formatter<'_>) -> fmt::Result {
            let mut cur: &Option<Box<Node>> = &self.head;
            let mut result = String::new();

            while let Some(node) = cur {
                result = format!("{} {}", result, node.value);
                cur = &node.next;
            }

            write!(f, "{}", result);
        }
    }
    ```

- This way we can directly print out the linked list with `println!("{}", list)` macro.

### Deriving Traits

- One can derive some traits with reasonable default implementation on structs(objects). For example:

    ```rust
    #[derive(Debug, PartialEq, Clone, Copy)]
    struct Point {
        x: f64,
        y: f64,
    }
    ```

- For these four traits derived here for `Point`, they include the following meaning respectively:

    - `Debug`: allow printing out full debug info of the object of this type with specifier `{:?}`
    - `PartialEq`: allow comparing variables of this same type using double equal sign
    - `Clone`: ...
    - `Copy`: ...

## Generics

- TODO
