---
title: CS110L L2 - Program Analysis
date: 2025-05-01 00:17
categories: 笔记
tags:
    - rust
    - c
excerpt: Some tools and methods used for program analysis, including static/dynamic analysis
---

{% notel orange fa-triangle-exclamation Warning %}
If someone is reading this blog, please be aware that the writer **did not** consider the experience of the other readers.
After all, the most important part is about writing things down for better memorization.
{% endnotel %}

## Valgrind

- Valgrind is an instrumentation framework for building dynamic analysis tools. There are Valgrind tools that can automatically detect many memory management and threading bugs, and profile your programs in detail.

- The tool does it's job by modifying some of the assembly code which is assosiated to memory operation, like `call malloc` or `load`/`store`, when executing the code.

- It is doing what we call 'dynamic analysis', which is _run the program and watch what it does._

- Though it is able to detect heap-based buffer overflows, valgrind cannot detect stack-based buffer overflows, as it does not know the source code of the program and has no idea about the stack layout.

## LLVM Sanitizers

- Instead of instrumenting binary file like Valgrind does, it instruments the source code.

- There're several kinds of sanitizers, including memory sanitizer, leak sanitizer, undefined behavior sanitizer and thread sanitizer.

## Fundamental Limitation of Dynamic Analysis

- **Dynamic analysis can only report bad behavior that actually happened.**

- The program might crash due to some specific input from the user which is probably not going to show up during the test/dynamic analysis.

- This leads to the fact that, we just can't find lots of the issues before it happens. There're just too much possible issues.

## Fuzzing Testing

- A very simple but extremely effective way to find bugs.

- AFL & libfuzzer

- Still can not provide any guarantees that a program is bug-free.

## Static Analysis

- Static analyzers could be helpful when finding bugs in the code by doing data-flow analysis. It can detect some edge cases that dynamic analysis might never be able to run into.

- However, static analyzers can report a lot of false positives, which means that reporting bugs that could only be triggerred theoratically and impossible in real world.

- Also, tracing every possible control flow could be a very cpu-consuming job.

- Plus a whole bunch of potential problems. There're just too many possible issues that exceeds the limit of code analysis.
