---
title: CS110L L3 - Ownership & Error Handling
date: 2025-05-01 17:04
categories: 笔记
tags:
    - rust
    - c
excerpt: The design of ownership and error handling in Rust and why they're needed
---

{% notel orange fa-triangle-exclamation Warning %}
If someone is reading this blog, please be aware that the writer **did not** consider the experience of the other readers.
After all, the most important part is about writing things down for better memorization.
{% endnotel %}

## Ownership

### Ownership in C

- There's actually no ownership design in C, which means that the language, or more specifically the compiler, does not check anything about ownership, leaving the burden to the programmers.

- For example, look at the declaration of the function below:

    ```c
    /**
     * dvb_unregister_frontend() - Unregisters a DVB frontend
     *
     * @fe: pointer to &struct dvb_frontend
     *
     * Stops the frontend kthread, calls dvb_unregister_device() and fress the
     * private frontend data allocated by dvb_unregister_frontend().
     *
     * NOTE: This function doesn't free the memory allocated by the demod,
     * by the SEC driver and by the tuner. In order to free it, an explicit call to
     * dvb_frontend_detach() is needed, after calling this function.
     */
    int dvb_unregister_frontend(struct dvb_frontend *fe);
    ```

- Just from the doc comment for this function, you can tell that the memory management process is like messy. Programmers should be cautious when invoking those functions, carefully reading doc comment for each one to understand the ownership implications.

- Not only that, the memory area pointed to by the pointer taken as a parameter in this function cannot be freed with `free()`, there's a specific function called `dvb_frontend_detach` responsible for destroying that heap-allocated memory.

---

- As a result, it could be really difficult to handle the creation and destruction of heap areas in C. It is very common to forget about clearing up memory areas after using them, or dereference pointers pointing to memory areas that have been freed already early on, which would cause a seg fault.

### Ownership in Rust

- Rust addresses this problem with a unique concept: **ownership**.

    > Ownership is Rust’s most unique feature and has deep implications for the rest of the language. It enables Rust to make memory safety guarantees without needing a garbage collector, so it’s important to understand how ownership works.

- Three ownership rules:

    1. Each value in Rust has an owner.
    2. There can only be one owner at a time.
    3. When the owner goes out of scope, the value will be dropped.

### Ownership with Rust Exmaples

```rust
fn log(s: String) {
    println!("{}", s);
}

fn main() {
    let s = String::from("hello");
    log(s);
    log(s);
}
```

- The code above won't compile. Reason is that the first time we invoke `log` on `s`, the function takes the ownership of the string so the second time we call it, `s` no longer owns the string `"hello"` anymore.

- In other words, the memory that stores the string `"hello"` would have been freed after the first call to `log(s)`.

- Here we can see that Rust is trying to make sure that every value is not `NULL` or `None` when they are used, in a very strict way. Any manipulation(i.e., borrowing) of the value is treated with caution; hence, the value is often not allowed after such an operation.

- In C, where the allocation and deallocation of the memory is controlled manually by the programmer, you can free the buffer `s` anywhere in the code. Either after the first time calling `log`, or the second time, or even inside the `log` function(right after printing the string to the standard output). This seems manageable in a simple example like the one above, but you can't make that promise anymore when the complexity of the code grows. (Reality has proven this.)

    ```c
    void log(char *s) {
        printf("%s\n", s);
        // free(s); ?
    }

    int main() {
        char *s = strdup("hello");
        log(s);
        // free(s); ?
        log(s);
        // free(s); ?

        return 0;
    }
    ```

    - You might encounter _use-after-free_ or _double-free_ issue, or even _memory leak_ if you forget to free the buffer.

---

```rust
fn main() {
    let s = String::from("hello");

    let s1 = &s;
    let s2 = &s;

    println!("{} {} {}", s, s1, s2);
}
```

- This code compiles without error. `&` stands for _borrowing_ (i.e., referencing), which does not tranfer the ownership from its original owner.

- However if we change one of the references to a _mutable_ reference, like the way down below:

    ```rust
    let s1 = &mut s;
    let s2 = &s;
    ```

- Then it won't compile. This introduces another rule about borrowing:

    - **At any given time, you can have either one mutable reference or any number of immutable references.**

- The purpose of this rule is easy to understand: You don't want the data you're reading to change unexpectedly. So Rust enforces that only one entity may mutate a value at a time, and during mutation, no other entity may read or write to it. But it's okay that more than one guy reading from the same value, as long as none of them is modifying it.

## Error Handling

TODO

## To Be Continued...
